--- bare metal printf and other utils ---
there are several permutations of integer types we need to support. these are:
unsigned int
signed int
unsigned long int
signed long int

we also want to support printing in different bases. these are:
binary (base 2),
decimal (base 10),
hex (base 16).

///// how are function pointers denoted in c?

we convert each of these types of integers into ascii characters and then write them into some output pointer
provided by our printf callee. the code for conversion is the same across all of the different types, 
but the function signatures differ by the input num type.

the function signatures for these must support an int flag input, which will be used by callees
that are trying to print hex numbers to signal whether the character should be uppercase or not.

the crux of the problem is that ascii values for digits are not the same as their numerical value.
so the ascii value for 9 is not '9'.

we also have functions for converting from ascii char into decimal, and from ascii chars into an integer.
these are relatively straight forward.

printf takes in variadic arguments. this means that we can provide n args to our printf statement, and it
will handle them all. in c, functions with variadic arguments have an ellipses in the function signature.
the arguments we pass to the printf statement are converted into a c native struct called a va_list. 
our printf functoin doesn't actualy handle printing itself. it is provided with a void *ptr, which it writes
into. in our hobby os, this will point to the uart output.

---
conversion int -> ascii:
    iterate through the place values of the input number. this gives us the value of the lowest "digit" in that
    base.
    if the digit we're looking at is less than 10, its ascii value will be the ascii of '0' + digit.
    if the digit is larger than 10 (which will happen in base 16), we need to use ascii alphabetical symbols
    to represent the digit, because 0-9 can only represent numbers in base 10 or lower. in this case,
    the ascii value of the digit will be the ascii value of digit + 'A' - 10 if the uppercase flag is set,
    otherwise it will be the ascii value of digit + 'a' - 10. the subtraction is there because:
        if we want the value 10 to become the ascii 'A' or 'a', we can't just do digit + 'A'. this will give us
        an ascii value that is 10 higher than 'A'.
    we write this value into our output buffer and continue to the next digit.
    after all the digits have been written into the buffer, we append an 0 (char, not ascii value '0') to the end 
    of the buffer as a terminal character.

putting a number with fill chars:
    decide whether you want your fill char to be ' ' or '0'.


tfp_format:
    create some char buffer of fixed length. this will be where we write any integer-to-ascii conversions
    we do.

    iterate over the format string one char at a time.
    if the char is ordinary text, send the char to our put pointer using our put function.
    if the char is a %, we consume it and move to the next token.
    we need to do some checks before we get to our actual handling of the variadic argument:
        if the new char is a '0', we want to have our output number padded with '0', rather than ' '. we incr our ch
        pointer after this.
        if the char is between '0' and '9', 
        if the char is 'l', we set a long flag to true and then increment out ch pointer.
    we can now match on our ch pointer:
        if 'u':
            convert the unsigned (either long or not, depending on long support) int to ascii and write it into
            the buffer we created at the start of the function. 
            use our special put with fill chars function to write to our output pointer using a putter function,
            using base 10, with the width we want, whether we want leading zeroes and the buffer we just wrote into.
        if 'd':
            convert signed (either long or not) int to ascii and write into the buffer we created.
            use put with fill chars to write to output pointer, same as above.
        if 'x' or 'X':
            convert unsigned hex int to ascii and write into the buffer we created.
            use put with fill chars to write to output pointer, same as above except with base 16.
        if 'c':
            use put function (no need for any i2a conversions or padding) to write to put pointer. the 
            buffer we pass the put function is the variadic arg macro cast to a char pointer.
        if 's':
            use put with fill chars to write to output pointer, with the leading zeroes flag set to 0 (so no lzs).
        case '%':
            write a literal '%' using put function.
        _:
            break;

init_printf:
    we set the static global stdout_putf function to the provided function.
    we set the static void *stdout_putp pointer to the provided pointer.

tfp_printf:
    provided with a format string and variadic args.
    declares a va_list struct and uses the macro va_start(created struct, format string) to populate.
    calls tfp_format, passing stdout_putp, stdout_putf, format string and the va list.
    destructs the va list using the macro va_end(va).

putcp: ### COME BACK TO THIS.
    writes a char at a given pointer. the syntax for this is fucked so i'm just going to write it down.
    static void putcp(void *p, char c) {
        *(*((char**)p))++ = c
    }

    this fuckery has to do with allowing us to write at a series of memory addresses next to each other.
    if we have a pointer at the memory we're tring to write a char at, 
    
    we can't do any pointer manipulation to write a character into the address after 
    the one we're currently pointing at. 
    
    we'd increment the value stored
    at that address, rather than incrementing the pointer and moving it to the next address (which is what 
    we want). instead, if we have a **p++, we no longer have a pointer to the address in memory we want to write
    to, we have a pointer to that pointer. if we now dereference this pointer

tfp_sprintf:


---


--- timer and hardware interrupts ---
our timer functionality is very basic. we need to init it with some interval, after which it will issue an
interrupt. after it interrupts, we read the value of the timer, add some interval to it and write it back into
the timer, after which it will trigger another interrupt.



--- processes --- ######### NEED TO FINISH
we need a struct to capture the state of a process. in linux, this is called a task_struct.
the task struct encapsulates the:
    cpu context,
    state,
    counter,
    priority,
    preempt count
of the process

the cpu context encapsulates the values stored in the registers x19-x28 + fp (x29), sp and pc (x30).


--- exception types ---

there are four types of exceptions:
    synchronous exception:
        these are generated by userspace processes, either via an intentional instruction,
        svc, or because they've tried to do something incorrect, like access memory
        at a non-existent address or an address that process doesn't have access to.
        they're called synchronous exceptions because the processor only does one thing
        at a time, i.e everything that the processor does happens synchronously.
    IRQ, interrupt request, also called asynchronous exceptions:
        these are generated by hardware, such as a timer. they're called asynchronous
        exceptions because they have nothing to do with the instruction the processor 
        is currently trying to execute. 
    FIQ, fast interrupt request:
        these are exceptions with high priority and are generated by hardware, like IRQs.
    SError, system error:
        these are also generated by hardware, but they always indicate some error condition,
        whereas other exceptions may be non-error requests.

--- exception vectors ---

there are several different states the processor can be in when an exception is thrown. there are also several 
different exceptions that can be thrown. each permutation of exception/processor state needs its own handler.

say we've generated an exception and now our processor has moved into el1 to handle it.
the four states the processor could be are:

the four states the processor could be in are:
    EL1h:
        the exception was generated while the processor was in el1, but the stack pointer the el1 process was
        using at the time the exception was generated was the el0 stack pointer.

    EL1t:
        the exception was generated while the processor was in el1, and the stack pointer the el1 process was
        using was its own el1 stack pointer.

    EL0_64:
        the exception was generated while the processor was in el0, running in 64 bit mode (remember, we are
        now in el1 because we have promoted our el from 0 to 1 in order to handle this exception).

    EL0_32:
        the exception was generated while the processor was in el0, running in 32 bit mode (remember, we are
        now in el1 because we have promoted our el from 0 to 1 in order to handle this exception).

in total, we have to define 16 exception/processor state permutations. we have to have a unique handler for
each of these.

the vector table is the struct that holds these 16 handlers. each of the 16 handlers that populate the table
is an exception vector. each exception vector must be exactly 0x80 bytes long, but we are
allowed to jump to code outside of the exception vector when we are handling the exception.

whenever we handle an exception, we have to save our processor state before we handle it (see kernel entry &
exit below). 

in this os implementation, our vector table becomes 16 macro definitions, one after the other. the vector
entry macro takes in a label and branches to that label. our macro must use a .align directive so that each of
our exception vectors is 0x80 bytes long.

in this os implementation, the only exception vector have a proper handler defined for is an IRQ from EL1h 
(this will handle our timer interrupts for us).

---
(macro) vector_entry:
provide the macro with a label.
include a align 7 directive so that our next vector entry is 0x80 bytes after this one.
branch to the provided label.

irq_vector_init:
get the address where we've stored the first exception vector into x0.
move from register x0 into special register vbar_el1. we'll use this later whenever we want to get a handler.
ret.

(macro) handle_invalid_entry_type:
save processor state before we start handling the exception (call kernel_entry macro).
move the value of the "type" arg passed to the macro (accessed via #\type) into x0.
move to register x1 from special register esr_el1.
move to register x2 from special register elr_el1.
branch with link to the show_invalid_entry_message, which will use the values in x0, x1 and x2.
branch to err_hang macro. this is because this is for handling errors we don't know how to recover from.

//////////////// return processor to pre-exception state (call kernel_exit macro).
---

--- masking & unmasking interrupts ---

masking interrupts prevents them from triggering. there are some pieces of code that we never want to be interrupted.
for example, any time we're saving/restoring processor state (kerne_entry and kernel_exit). if we were to trigger
and interrupt in the middle of one of these, we'd lose the processor state we're trying to save or restore.

i believe masking interrupts only means that the interrupt is not handled right now, rather than disappearing
completely. i believe that once we unmask the interrupt type, any interrupts that occurred during the masking
will be handled.

we always mask interrupts when we trigger exception handlers, then unmask them (reenable them) once we're done
saving processor state. we can actually unmask interrups as soon as we're finished saving our processor state,
which allows us to have nested interrupts. if we were going to do this, we'd have to remask before we try and
load our previous processor state.

there is a single special register responsible for masking exceptions, and another special register for unmasking.
the bits in these registers control which types of exceptions are masked/unmasked. although there are two
separate registers, one for turning masks on and one for turning them off, they both control a single mask state.
this is done because it means we only need to worry about changing the one mask bit we care about. we don't have to
worry about whether any of the other bits are set and whether we need to preserve them.
for example, if we're masking all exceptions and want to unmask IRQs, we only have to use a single instruction:
    msr daifset, #2
and we don't have to worry about preserving the state of the other 3 bits.

the different settings are:
    D, debug exceptions:
        these are a special type of synchronous exception. they're generally related to breakpoints or
        debuggers. 
        most synchronous exceptions are not maskable. because they're associated with the process' instruction
        flow, its pretty much impossible to continue on in the instruction flow without having handled the exception
        (think we call malloc in userspace. if we've masked synchronous interrupts and haven't allocated memory as a 
        result, the subsequent write to the memory we've requested will be invalid).

    A: SError exceptions:
        these are abbreviated with 'A' because they're also called asynchronous interrupts.

    I: IRQ exceptions

    F: FIQ exceptions

---
enable_irq:
    move the immediate 2 into the special register daifclr. (this will only mask IRQs)
    ret.

disable_irq:
    move the immediate 2 into the special register daifset. (this will only mask IRQs)
    ret.
---

--- interrupt controller --- ###### NOT FINISHED.
interrupts generated by hardware don't interrupt the CPU directly. instead, the interact with an interrupt
controller, which gets the CPU to take an interrupt and then go to the exception vector containing the
code for handling the interrupt. the interrupt controller can also be used to disable interrupts generated
by hardware.

the raspberry pi has 3 registers which act as its interrupt controller. each of the bits in these three regs
are responsible for masking different interrupts. the registers are:
    

--- kernel entry & exit ---

the kernel entry and exit macros are for saving processor state when exceptions are generated.
this allows us to handle an exception and then resume from the exact state that the
processor was in before it entered exception handling

for a simple os, all we need to do is save registers x0-x30 to the stack by
allocating space on the stack by moving the sp, then storing pairs of registers
using the stp instruction.

---
kernel_entry:
we add S_FRAME_SIZE onto the stack (remember, the stack grows down, so "add" here means sub).
we store pairs of x registers (x0, x1) onto the stack starting at sp.
for each additional pair we store, we provide our store pair instruction with (sp + (16 * n))
which stores from the sp back up.
our last register, x30, will not have a pair and should use str instead of stp.

kernel_exit:
we're not allocating anything to the stack here, so we don't need to perform a sub from sp.
we load values from the stair into pairs of registers starting at sp.
when we stored these values onto the stack, two registers went into a single space on the
stack, so when we're reading back out, a single space on the stack will go into two regs.
for each additional pair we load, we privde the load pair instruction with (sp + (16 * n)).
our last register, x30, will not have a pair and should use ldr instead of stp.
we need to move the stack pointer back up, because we're done with this stack space.
we do this by adding S_FRAME_SIZE back onto sp.
we execute an eret, returning us to normal function.
---

--- lowering the kernel from el3 to el1 ---

we boot the kernel in el3 and need to lower it to el1.
we do this by overwriting the values of several system registers, and then executing an eret.
the system registers we overwrite control the exception level the current process is operating in,
so when we execute the eret, we jump into el1 instead of returning to el3.

we start out by defining some constants:
SCTLR_VALUE_MMU_DISABLED = the hardware value disabling the MMU
HCR_VALUE
SCR_VALUE
SPSR_VALUE

---
we load SCTLR_VALUE_MMU_DISABLED from memory into a register (x0).
we move from that register into the sctlr_el1 system reg.

we load HCR_VALUE from memory into a register (x0).
we move from that register into the hcr_el2 system reg.

we load SCR_VALUE from memory into a register (x0).
we move from that register into the scr_el3 system reg.

we load from SPSR_VALUE from memory into a register (x0).
we move from that register into the spsr_el3 system reg.

we put the address of the label el1_entry from memory into a register.
we load from that register into the elr_el3 system reg.

we execute an eret. this sets processor state to our custom setting we've put in spsr_el3,
and jumps to the custom address we've put in elr_el3.
----

we have other versions of these status registers for controlling the same functionality
at other exception levels. these other versions have different _elX suffixes.
for example, the elr_el2 system register controls where el2 jumps to when the process 
is in el2 and an eret is executed. some of these registers only exist for el3 because
they control functionality that doesn't exist at lower els. for example, el3 is the only
el that can configure whether lower els run in "secure" or "non-secure" mode and the scr_el3
register controls this. because this functionality doesn't exist at a lower el, there is no
scr_el2 or scr_el1 equivalent.

the status registers we use in the above code have special purposes. these are:

sctlr_el1:
    this controls behaviour of the processor in el1. "behaviour" here means whether the MMU is on/off,
    what the cache/alignnment bits are set to and other execution behaviour.

hcr_el2:
    this controls virtualization settings, or how el1 will function when an el2
    exists above it and is controlling it.

scr_el3:
    this controls how we hand off from el3 to a lower el.
    these controls are whether the new el runs in AArch64 or AArch32, whether the new
    exception level runs in "secure" or "non-secure" mode.

spsr_el3:
    the saved program status register. we manually overwrite this so that when we execute
    our eret instruction, we load some special el1 state back, rather than the same state
    the processor was in when we entered this instruction. "state" here means:
        which stack pointer we're currently using,
            (note: an el can either use its own sp, or the sp of el0.
            EL1t = sp of el0.
            EL1h = sp of el1.)
        which exceptions are masked,
        what the condition flags are,

elr_el3:
    holds the address we return to when an eret instruction is executed. !!! what is the value 
    stored in el1_entry?